Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Michael Bishop has written a number of stunning science fiction works, such as the novels Eyes of Fire,
the 1983 Nebula-winning No Enemy But Time, and the Urban Nucleus series, A Little Knowledge and Catacomb Years.
Bishop is also a master at writing short stories.
Some of his outstanding stories are On the Street of Serpents, Death and Designation Among the Asadi, and The White Otters of Childhood.
Fans and fellow writers alike have lauded Bishop.
He has been nominated for some 11 Hugo and Nebula awards.
Bishop's academic training is in English.
We asked him why he writes science fiction rather than mainstream.
Well, the truth is that I have wanted to be a writer since I was in about the eighth grade,
and I did not necessarily want to be a science fiction writer.
I wanted to be just a writer.
The reason that I'm doing science fiction now, or have done primarily science fiction,
is that I was first successful in submitting stories that had a fantastic or a science fictional element,
and in having them sell.
The other stories, the mainstream stories that I wrote, received primarily rejection slips early on.
And as I've said before, I'm kind of like the rat in the experimental cage who goes to the lever and presses it,
and when the food comes out of one particular lever, that's the one he goes back to and continues to press.
And that's the way I have done as far as science fiction goes to some extent.
It's not that I don't care for science fiction, and I'm doing it solely because it was profitable,
or more profitable than the other type of writing,
but simply that I ended up finding very receptive editors in this particular field,
and that accounts for it, more or less.
Science fiction is attractive to Bishop, too,
because it allows him the freedom to write about a number of subjects and situations.
I think that science fiction does permit a writer to deal with just about anything that he or she wishes to deal with.
You can handle contemporary events by projecting them into the future.
You can speculate about the past.
You can speculate about the distant, distant future.
You can speculate about origins and ultimate ends.
So that I think that really science fiction is a tremendously flexible genre,
and that's one of its main attractions to me.
And one of the reasons why I think I continue to write it,
even though I have aspirations to do other things and have done other things.
A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire, Bishop's first novel, came out in 1975.
Its revision, entitled Eyes of Fire, came out in 1980.
This novel relates the conflict between two cultures,
an advanced space-faring culture and a primitive one.
As do many of Bishop's works, this novel carries a heavy, effectively used dose of anthropology.
We asked Bishop about the basis of this book.
It's a parable of some of the things that have happened in our past
and that continue to happen in our relationships to primitive peoples today.
And I probably should put primitive in quotes because that's a term that is frowned upon
in anthropological circles right now.
But at any rate, I do think that it was a kind of dramatic framing of situations
that have taken place in the confrontation between advanced civilizations
and supposedly primitive, in quotes, civilizations.
And it seems to me that in projecting it into a setting on a distant planet,
that I was just kind of presuming that this was the sort of thing that could happen over and over again.
But at the same time, really, it was a comment on the conflict between two different approaches of viewing the world.
One, rather, the technological approach, and one, the rather mystical or, what do you call it, the left brain side.
We'll have more with Michael Bishop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Two closely related works by Michael Bishop are A Little Knowledge and Catacomb Years.
A Little Knowledge is a collection of loosely connected short stories, and Catacomb Years is a novel.
Both are about people who inhabit the urban nucleus of Atlanta,
a future domed Atlanta isolated from the rest of the world.
Here Bishop tells us why he used the concept of a domed city.
Each one of the cities was its own universe, its own world.
The people were withdrawn and isolated, and they practiced the kind of isolationism.
In fact, in the story, "The Windows in Dante's Hell", the old woman, Amelia Longhope,
who is bound by two people who were going to her apartment, really, to discover what's happened to her.
They find that she has created an entire world in her apartment,
which resembles the bridge of a starship, as from an old television program,
and that she has been looking outward while her own society has been looking inward.
So that was one of the things that I was trying to do with the domed city.
I wasn't interested in the domed city as a technological marvel so much as I was in a...
I guess I was looking at each city as a kind of petri dish,
and I was trying to see what the human beings, the bacteria, whatever you want to call them,
inside that petri dish were going to do, how they were going to behave,
and why they were behaving in the ways that they did.
So it was one way of focusing in on the human condition in an unusual way and in a metaphorical way.
A recurring theme in Bishop's work seems to be an emphasis on eyes.
For instance, there's his first novel, A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire.
The Asadi and Transfigurations have prominent eyes which figure significantly in the plot.
The aliens in his first short story, Pinyonfall, have strange multi-lensed eyes.
We asked Bishop about eyes and what they symbolize.
It has always seemed to me that the eyes are, what's the old cliche, the windows of the soul.
And for an alien species, I think they would be similarly a means of looking into the heart of the creature who has those eyes.
I think, too, I was looking early on when I wrote the early story, "Piñon Fall", which was my first story,
I was looking for a way of making my aliens seem alien.
And one of the ways was to describe them physically.
And one of the most outstanding characteristics of any creature, I think, are the eyes
and how they differ from one species to another.
So the aliens in "Piñon Fall" had eyes like insects.
In A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire, I guess I was, again, looking for a means,
an exotic means of establishing the fact that my aliens were truly alien.
And by giving them different eyes, eyes like gems, that was one way of doing that.
There may have been some subliminal influence, too, from one of the novels of Ursula Le Guin.
I'm trying to think now, which was A City of Illusions.
I think one of her characters had very, very strange eyes.
But Ursula Le Guin has been an influence on me from way back.
And maybe that came into it to some extent, too.
As far as the eyes of the Asadi go and the fact that they are a means of communication
as well as a means of seeing and also a means of feeding,
when you discover that they enabled these creatures to photosynthesize part of their food,
I think there I was looking at the eyes in a functional sense as well as in a symbolic sense,
as if they really were a physical component of their makeup that could help them survive.
More with Michael Bishop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
One of science fiction writer Michael Bishop's most successful short stories is
Death and Designation Among the Asadi, which appeared in 1973.
In 1979, Bishop published the novel Transfigurations,
which was a so-called fix-up of this short story.
That is, the story served as the initial third of the novel,
then more material was added to continue it.
Here Bishop tells us how this came about.
I think when I wrote that story back in 72 or 73,
that I felt that I was pretty much finished with it, that it was complete.
By the time I actually undertook to do Transfigurations,
I had thought some more about the characters in that story, both the humans and the aliens.
And I had also done a great deal of reading on human origins,
a lot of which I worked into the novel that followed that one, No Enemy But Time.
But at the same time, I guess I was really kind of laying the groundwork for No Enemy But Time
with the research that I did that carried me through Transfigurations.
The reason that I probably expanded Transfigurations or Death and Designation among the Asadi
into a full-length novel that I called Transfigurations
is that by that time I was a full-time writer.
I knew that this was one of my most popular stories,
that there had been questions about it.
Some of the loose ends had not been tied up.
And I wanted to deal with the material again.
And I wanted to deal with it from the perspective of my new knowledge
about human origins and primate anthology, that sort of thing.
So that was one of the reasons that I went ahead,
used the original novella as part of the text
and created a good deal of more information about new characters
and a sequel to the original novella in the course of the novel.
Transfigurations details an anthropological study of a group of primitive aliens.
Or as Bishop warns us, we must put the primitive in quotation marks.
Anthropology forms the basis for Bishop's perhaps most important novel,
No Enemy But Time.
This novel won the 1983 Nebula Award.
The protagonist, Joshua Kampa, is capable of a sort of time travel through dreams.
In No Enemy But Time, he travels to a simulacrum of Pleistocene East Africa,
an African inhabited by man's distant ancestors.
Campa lives among these hominids, ostensibly to study them,
but he gets involved in their lives.
We commented to Bishop that writing this book must have required a lot of research.
I've told people that I probably did three and a half to four years of research for that book,
and I believe that that's true.
And by that, I don't mean that I was continuously researching and doing nothing else,
not writing anything else, but only researching.
But I nevertheless did spend a great, great deal of time reading material
to make my proto-humans, my hominids in that book,
as near to the real thing as I could imagine.
So I read people like Louis B. Leakey and Mary Leakey and Richard Leakey,
the entire Leakey clan, Donald Johanson,
everything I could get my hands on in scientific journals and news magazines
that related to new discoveries in East Africa, Tanzania, Kenya,
wherever they happened to be, Ethiopia, when Donald Johanson came along.
So yes, I spent an awful lot of time researching the physical nature,
the stature, the possible lifestyles of these hominids,
but also the flora and fauna at the same period so that I could make a credible stab
at what kinds of other animals they would encounter,
what kind of vegetation they would be living among,
how they would have to go about their survival strategies, in other words.
So yes, that took me a lot of time.
I found it very, very enjoyable while I was doing,
and I've really kind of put it out of my mind since then.
I imagine that I may come back to it later on,
but I have kind of set it aside since then.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
You might have overheard some junior high or high school students talking about fighting trolls
or battling an evil wizard and thought nothing of it.
But you might stop and stare if you heard a lawyer or doctor saying the same thing.
Well, it could happen and does most every weekend all across the U.S.,
and it's spreading around the world.
Right.
What we're talking about is Dungeons & Dragons,
a fantasy role-playing game produced by TSR Hobbies.
We talked with Dr. John Eric Holmes, author of fantasy role-playing games,
who edited the original basic set of rules for Dungeons & Dragons.
Holmes teaches in the School of Medicine at USC.
We asked him to give us a layman's description of the game.
Dungeons & Dragons, or the other role-playing games,
are a game where a group of people get together,
and one of them devises the kind of skeleton outline of a story.
In Dungeons & Dragons it would be a story about fabulous treasure
or a monster in a cave or in a dungeon or something like that.
And the other people, each one of them takes the part of a single adventurer.
And in Dungeons & Dragons you can be an elf or a dwarf or a hobbit
or a wizard or a hero.
And then they pretend to go into the story
and try and solve the mystery or find the treasure or whatever,
and they all sit around the table and do this,
and they decide how things come out if they have to decide how an event occurs
by just rolling dice and consulting a table in the book to see how the things occur.
So it's a story that's built up by a group of friends working together between them.
That's what it is, really.
Dungeons & Dragons, known as D&D, is similar to chess
in that there are several different types of pieces or characters on the board.
But the difference is that the players controlling the characters
don't know what the whole board looks like.
They only know the areas where they have been and where they are at the moment.
Right. Any new area has to be explored, just as if you were really there.
If you want to know what's behind a door,
you tell the dungeon master that you want your character to open the door and look inside.
The dungeon master, or DM, is like a referee.
He knows the plot of the scenario the players are involved in
and tells them of the outcome of their actions.
The game can sound very involved with someone who has never played it,
but most of the work is done by the dungeon master,
who is usually an experienced player.
The game's situation is similar to much of the fantasy literature that is popular today,
but with a difference.
Holmes talks about the popularity of Dungeons & Dragons
and its relationship to current fantasy literature.
Playing the game is different from reading a story.
If you read a story, you can kind of imagine yourself being the hero,
and if the story's well written, you can really get into the hero's problems
and you can see the wonders that he sees and the excitement that he experiences.
You can imagine how you might have handled things or what might happen if you had lived in those times.
And there were a lot of people in the country at the time that Dungeons & Dragons were created
who kind of had daydreams about what they would do if they were hobbits
or if they were dwarves or if they were elves or heroes.
And in the game, you come a lot closer to being a hobbit or a dwarf or an elf or a hero or a wizard
than you do in just reading about it or that you do in just imagining it all by yourself
because you have several other people playing with you,
and let's say you decide that you want to be a wizard,
and all your friends agree that you are a wizard or that you're a character in the game,
but you start talking about that person as if it were yourself,
is a wizard.
And for, you know, four to six hours once a week in the evening,
you feel like you really are that person.
And that's a lot more exciting than just reading about such a person.
More with Dr. Holmes on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
We're talking with Dr. John Eric Holmes,
author of Fantasy Role Playing Games,
about the leading fantasy game Dungeons & Dragons.
The game was created by Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson
in the late 60s and early 70s.
Gygax now runs TSR Hobbies,
the company that produces Dungeons & Dragons,
as well as other role playing games.
Several years ago, there was an incident
that put Dungeons & Dragons in the public eye.
Supposedly, a student was killed
playing a game of live Dungeons & Dragons
in the steam tunnels under a university.
That story made national news,
but when the entire story was uncovered,
it wasn't near as interesting
and was buried in the back section, so to speak.
We asked Holmes to relate the entire incident.
Wasn't there a college student from Michigan
who got killed playing live Dungeons & Dragons
in the steam tunnels under Michigan State University?
No, there wasn't.
There was a college student at University of Michigan, I've forgotten which it was,
who disappeared,
and his family couldn't find him.
He was a Dungeons & Dragons player,
and one of the things that the investigators,
and they hired a private detective,
family hired a private detective to try and locate him.
One of the things that he found was a series of maps,
which were probably Dungeons & Dragons maps,
a lot of mysterious maps.
And somebody suggested that they were maps
of the steam tunnels underneath the university
and that people had been playing Dungeons & Dragons
in the steam tunnels.
As far as I know,
that's never really been proven to be the case,
that anybody was actually playing in the steam tunnels.
Anyway, he turned up alive.
He showed up,
and I think he had gone to visit some member of his family
some distance away.
And when there was enough publicity,
there was a lot of publicity about this,
a lot of television and radio news coverage of it
when it occurred,
partly, I think,
because the news media people sensed
that this was a weird cult,
like the Jonestown massacre thing,
which had occurred a year or so before.
And they thought they were on to something really bizarre.
But he turned up alive,
and his disappearance had to do with his own personal life
and his own personal problems, I guess,
and had nothing to do with his playing Dungeons & Dragons.
Another controversy that has brought some criticism of the game
is the use of certain mythological creatures in the game.
The game's fantasy element includes demons and devils
based either on popular books or classical myths.
The accusation usually is
that the game is dangerous
because it's actually teaching children.
Of course, the people who are playing the game
are frequently adults and not children,
but, you know,
it depends on what age you consider to be a child,
and there certainly are plenty of people
12 years old playing the game.
teaching them, you know,
the evil occult and demonological ritual.
And the people who make these accusations,
as it turns out,
are extremely religious people,
fundamentalist religious people,
who really believe in the existence
of the devil and his demons.
The flap over the use of the game,
particularly its use as a club in a high school
or something like that,
usually ends up to be involved with this controversy
about how serious do you take demonology.
And if you're serious about it,
then you don't want to have it as a game
or even as part of a game.
These elements can be left out of the game
if the people playing find it offensive.
There are hundreds of other mythical creatures
to test the mettle of any adventurer.
The game's creators never intended Dungeons & Dragons
to offend anyone's religious beliefs.
They only wanted to bring to life
the elements of fantasy
that so many people enjoy in books
like Lord of the Rings.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College
in Odessa, Texas.